README.md, before:

# st-link-analysis

[![Static Badge](https://img.shields.io/badge/GitHub-%20?&logo=github&color=grey)](https://github.com/AlrasheedA/st-link-analysis)
[![Static Badge](https://img.shields.io/badge/PyPI-%20?&logo=pypi&color=grey&logoColor=white)](https://pypi.org/project/st-link-analysis/)
[![Static Badge](https://img.shields.io/badge/Streamlit-%20?&logo=streamlit&color=grey&logoColor=white)](https://discuss.streamlit.io/t/new-component-interactive-graph-visualization-component-for-streamlit/73030)

A custom Streamlit component for link analysis, built with Cytoscape.js and Streamlit.

## Overview

This project provides a Streamlit custom component for visualizing and interacting with graph data using Cytoscape.js. It supports customizable edge and node styles, labels, colors, captions, and icons.

![screenshot](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/aae995d9-e752-4a96-a69a-2b38db56e0f7)

## Demo

A demo deployed with Render can be [accessed here](https://st-link-analysis-demo.onrender.com/).

## Features

-   **Customizable Node and Edge Styles**: Easily define the appearance of nodes and edges using a variety of style options.
-   **Material Icons Support**: Supports a subset of Material icons for styling nodes which can be passed by name (e.g., `icon='person'`). Custom icons can still be used by passing a URL (e.g., `icon='url(...)'`).
-   **Customizable Layouts**: Choose from different layout algorithms to arrange the graph elements.
-   **Interactive Features:**
    -   Toolbar with fullscreen, JSON export, and layout refresh buttons.
    -   View control bar for zooming, fitting, and centering the view, making it easier to navigate your graphs.
    -   View all properties of the selected elements in a side panel.
    -   Highlights neighboring nodes or edges when an element is selected.
-   **Node Actions (Expand / Remove):** Enable node removal and expansion using the `node_actions` parameter. Removal can be triggered by a delete keydown or a remove button click, while expansion occurs on a double-click or expand button click. When these events are triggered, the event details and selected node IDs are sent back to the Streamlit app as the component’s return value.

## Installation

To install the package, use pip:

```bash
pip install st-link-analysis
```

## Usage

Here is a basic example of how to use the component in your Streamlit app:

```python
import streamlit as st
from st_link_analysis import st_link_analysis, NodeStyle, EdgeStyle

st.set_page_config(layout="wide")

# Sample Data
elements = {
    "nodes": [
        {"data": {"id": 1, "label": "PERSON", "name": "Streamlit"}},
        {"data": {"id": 2, "label": "PERSON", "name": "Hello"}},
        {"data": {"id": 3, "label": "PERSON", "name": "World"}},
        {"data": {"id": 4, "label": "POST", "content": "x"}},
        {"data": {"id": 5, "label": "POST", "content": "y"}},
    ],
    "edges": [
        {"data": {"id": 6, "label": "FOLLOWS", "source": 1, "target": 2}},
        {"data": {"id": 7, "label": "FOLLOWS", "source": 2, "target": 3}},
        {"data": {"id": 8, "label": "POSTED", "source": 3, "target": 4}},
        {"data": {"id": 9, "label": "POSTED", "source": 1, "target": 5}},
        {"data": {"id": 10, "label": "QUOTES", "source": 5, "target": 4}},
    ],
}

# Style node & edge groups
node_styles = [
    NodeStyle("PERSON", "#FF7F3E", "name", "person"),
    NodeStyle("POST", "#2A629A", "content", "description"),
]

edge_styles = [
    EdgeStyle("FOLLOWS", caption='label', directed=True),
    EdgeStyle("POSTED", caption='label', directed=True),
    EdgeStyle("QUOTES", caption='label', directed=True),
]

# Render the component
st.markdown("### st-link-analysis: Example")
st_link_analysis(elements, "cose", node_styles, edge_styles)

```

## API Reference

| Element            | Description                                                                                                     |
| ------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `st_link_analysis` | Main component for creating and displaying the graph, including layout and height settings. Refer to docstring. |
| `NodeStyle`        | Defines styles for nodes, including labels, colors, captions, and icons. Refer to docstring.                    |
| `EdgeStyle`        | Defines styles for edges, including curve styles, labels, colors, and directionality. Refer to docstring.       |
| `Event`            | Define an event to pass to component function and listen to. Use sparingly Refer to docstring.                  |

## Development

-   Ensure you have Python 3.9+, Node.js, and npm installed.
-   Clone this repository
-   Navigate to root directory

### Python Setup

Create and activate a virtual environment, then install the package in editable mode:

```bash
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate # On Windows use `.venv\Scripts\activate`
pip install -e ".[dev]"
```

### Node Setup

Navigate to the frontend directory and install the necessary npm packages:

```bash
cd st_link_analysis/frontend
npm install
```

### Running the App

Change `RELEASE` flag in `st_link_analysis/component/component.py` to `False`.

In one terminal start the frontend dev server

```bash
cd st_link_analysis/frontend
npm run start
```

In another terminal run the streamlit server

```bash
cd examples
streamlit run app.py
```

### Testing

Run linting and tests:

```bash
ruff check
pytest
```

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please open an issue or submit a pull request for any improvements or bug fixes.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License. See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Acknowledgments

-   [Cytoscape.js](https://js.cytoscape.org/)
-   [Streamlit](https://www.streamlit.io/)
-   [Material Icons](https://fonts.google.com/icons)

Commit message:

chore: add mypy and update type hints across codebase

README.md, after:

# st-link-analysis

[![Static Badge](https://img.shields.io/badge/GitHub-%20?&logo=github&color=grey)](https://github.com/AlrasheedA/st-link-analysis)
[![Static Badge](https://img.shields.io/badge/PyPI-%20?&logo=pypi&color=grey&logoColor=white)](https://pypi.org/project/st-link-analysis/)
[![Static Badge](https://img.shields.io/badge/Streamlit-%20?&logo=streamlit&color=grey&logoColor=white)](https://discuss.streamlit.io/t/new-component-interactive-graph-visualization-component-for-streamlit/73030)

A custom Streamlit component for link analysis, built with Cytoscape.js and Streamlit.

## Overview

This project provides a Streamlit custom component for visualizing and interacting with graph data using Cytoscape.js. It supports customizable edge and node styles, labels, colors, captions, and icons.

![screenshot](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/aae995d9-e752-4a96-a69a-2b38db56e0f7)

## Demo

A demo deployed with Render can be [accessed here](https://st-link-analysis-demo.onrender.com/).

## Features

-   **Customizable Node and Edge Styles**: Easily define the appearance of nodes and edges using a variety of style options.
-   **Material Icons Support**: Supports a subset of Material icons for styling nodes which can be passed by name (e.g., `icon='person'`). Custom icons can still be used by passing a URL (e.g., `icon='url(...)'`).
-   **Customizable Layouts**: Choose from different layout algorithms to arrange the graph elements.
-   **Interactive Features:**
    -   Toolbar with fullscreen, JSON export, and layout refresh buttons.
    -   View control bar for zooming, fitting, and centering the view, making it easier to navigate your graphs.
    -   View all properties of the selected elements in a side panel.
    -   Highlights neighboring nodes or edges when an element is selected.
-   **Node Actions (Expand / Remove):** Enable node removal and expansion using the `node_actions` parameter. Removal can be triggered by a delete keydown or a remove button click, while expansion occurs on a double-click or expand button click. When these events are triggered, the event details and selected node IDs are sent back to the Streamlit app as the component's return value.

## Installation

To install the package, use pip:

```bash
pip install st-link-analysis
```

## Usage

Here is a basic example of how to use the component in your Streamlit app:

```python
import streamlit as st
from st_link_analysis import st_link_analysis, NodeStyle, EdgeStyle

st.set_page_config(layout="wide")

# Sample Data
elements = {
    "nodes": [
        {"data": {"id": 1, "label": "PERSON", "name": "Streamlit"}},
        {"data": {"id": 2, "label": "PERSON", "name": "Hello"}},
        {"data": {"id": 3, "label": "PERSON", "name": "World"}},
        {"data": {"id": 4, "label": "POST", "content": "x"}},
        {"data": {"id": 5, "label": "POST", "content": "y"}},
    ],
    "edges": [
        {"data": {"id": 6, "label": "FOLLOWS", "source": 1, "target": 2}},
        {"data": {"id": 7, "label": "FOLLOWS", "source": 2, "target": 3}},
        {"data": {"id": 8, "label": "POSTED", "source": 3, "target": 4}},
        {"data": {"id": 9, "label": "POSTED", "source": 1, "target": 5}},
        {"data": {"id": 10, "label": "QUOTES", "source": 5, "target": 4}},
    ],
}

# Style node & edge groups
node_styles = [
    NodeStyle("PERSON", "#FF7F3E", "name", "person"),
    NodeStyle("POST", "#2A629A", "content", "description"),
]

edge_styles = [
    EdgeStyle("FOLLOWS", caption='label', directed=True),
    EdgeStyle("POSTED", caption='label', directed=True),
    EdgeStyle("QUOTES", caption='label', directed=True),
]

# Render the component
st.markdown("### st-link-analysis: Example")
st_link_analysis(elements, "cose", node_styles, edge_styles)

```

## API Reference

| Element            | Description                                                                                                     |
| ------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `st_link_analysis` | Main component for creating and displaying the graph, including layout and height settings. Refer to docstring. |
| `NodeStyle`        | Defines styles for nodes, including labels, colors, captions, and icons. Refer to docstring.                    |
| `EdgeStyle`        | Defines styles for edges, including curve styles, labels, colors, and directionality. Refer to docstring.       |
| `Event`            | Define an event to pass to component function and listen to. Use sparingly Refer to docstring.                  |

## Development

-   Ensure you have Python 3.9+, Node.js, and npm installed.
-   Clone this repository
-   Navigate to root directory

### Python Setup

Create and activate a virtual environment, then install the package in editable mode:

```bash
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate # On Windows use `.venv\Scripts\activate`
pip install -e ".[dev]"
```

### Node Setup

Navigate to the frontend directory and install the necessary npm packages:

```bash
cd st_link_analysis/frontend
npm install
```

### Running the App

Change `RELEASE` flag in `st_link_analysis/component/component.py` to `False`.

In one terminal start the frontend dev server

```bash
cd st_link_analysis/frontend
npm run start
```

In another terminal run the streamlit server

```bash
cd examples
streamlit run app.py
```

### Testing

Run linting, type checking, and tests:

```bash
ruff check
mypy st_link_analysis/
pytest
```

### Type Checking

This project uses type hints and mypy for static type checking to improve code maintainability and developer experience. The mypy configuration is defined in `pyproject.toml` with strict settings to catch potential type-related issues early.

To run type checking locally:

```bash
mypy st_link_analysis/
```

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please open an issue or submit a pull request for any improvements or bug fixes.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License. See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Acknowledgments

-   [Cytoscape.js](https://js.cytoscape.org/)
-   [Streamlit](https://www.streamlit.io/)
-   [Material Icons](https://fonts.google.com/icons)
